For decades, the world has thought of Canada as America's friendly northern
neighbor -- a responsible, earnest, if somewhat boring, land of hockey fans and
single-payer health care. On the big issues, it has long played the global Boy
Scout, reliably providing moral leadership on everything from ozone protection
to land-mine eradication to gay rights. The late novelist Douglas Adams once
quipped that if the United States often behaved like a belligerent teenage boy,
Canada was an intelligent woman in her mid-30s. Basically, Canada has been the
United States -- not as it is, but as it should be.


Bookmark and Share More... But a dark secret lurks in the northern forests. Over
the last decade, Canada has not so quietly become an international mining center
and a rogue petrostate. It's no longer America's better half, but a dystopian
vision of the continent's energy-soaked future.

That's right: The good neighbor has banked its economy on the cursed elixir of
political dysfunction -- oil. Flush with visions of becoming a global energy
superpower, Canada's government has taken up with pipeline evangelists,
petroleum bullies, and climate change skeptics. Turns out the Boy Scout's not
just hooked on junk crude -- he's become a pusher. And that's not even the worst
of it.

With oil and gas now accounting for approximately a quarter of its export
revenue, Canada has lost its famous politeness. Since the Conservative Party won
a majority in Parliament in 2011, the federal government has eviscerated
conservationists, indigenous nations, European commissioners, and just about
anyone opposing unfettered oil production as unpatriotic radicals. It has
muzzled climate change scientists, killed funding for environmental science of
every stripe, and in a recent pair of unprecedented omnibus bills,
systematically dismantled the country's most significant long-cherished
environmental laws.

The author of this transformation is Prime Minister Stephen Harper, a right-wing
policy wonk and evangelical Christian with a power base in Alberta, ground zero
of Canada's oil boom. Just as Margaret Thatcher funded her political makeover of
Britain on revenue from North Sea oil, Harper intends to methodically rewire the
entire Canadian experience with petrodollars sucked from the ground. In the
process he has concentrated power in the prime minister's office and reoriented
Canada's foreign priorities. Harper, who took office in 2006, increased defense
spending by nearly $1 billion annually in his first four years, and he has
committed $2 billion to prison expansion with a "tough on crime" policy that
ignores the country's falling crime rate. Meanwhile, Canada has amassed a huge
federal debt -- its highest in history at some $600 billion and counting.



Liberal critics like to say that Harper's political revolution caught many
Canadians, generally a fat and apathetic people, by surprise -- a combination of
self-delusion and strategic deception. That may be true, but though Canadians
live in high latitudes, they're not above baser human instincts -- like greed.
Harper is aggressively pushing an economic gamble on oil, the world's most
volatile resource, and promising a new national wealth based on untapped riches
far from where most Canadians live that will fill their pocketbooks, and those
of their children, for generations. With nearly three-quarters of Canadians
supporting oil sands development in a recent poll, Harper seems to be selling
them on the idea.

THE RESOURCE UNDERWRITING many of these ugly behavioral changes is bitumen, a
heavy, sour crude mined from oil sands. Deposits of the badly degraded asphalt-
like substance lie under a forest the size of Florida in northeastern Alberta
and comprise the world's third-largest petroleum reserves. Over the last decade,
as oil prices increased fivefold, oil companies invested approximately $160
billion to develop bitumen in Alberta, and it has finally turned profitable.
Canada is now cranking out 1.7 million barrels a day of the stuff, and scheduled
production stands to fill provincial and federal government coffers with about
$120 billion in rent and royalties by 2020. More than 40 percent of that haul
goes directly to the federal government largely in the form of corporate taxes.
And the government wants even more; it's pushing for production to hit 5 million
barrels a day by 2030.

This is what an oil boom looks like: Photos from Alberta's dystopian oil sands
region Never mind that the entire process is a messy and wasteful one. It takes
copious amounts of water, capital, and energy to dig out the carbon-rich sands,
let alone upgrade and process the heavy crude, which can't even move through a
pipeline until it is diluted with an imported gasoline-like condensate. With
brazen cheek, the government nonetheless defends the Alberta megaproject as
"responsible" and "sustainable" -- "an enterprise of epic proportions, akin to
the building of the pyramids or China's Great Wall. Only bigger." Bigger indeed:
Approved bitumen mining projects could potentially excavate a forest area six
times as large as New York City. Reclamation and reforestation remain an
uncertain and costly proposition. To date, oil companies have already created
enough toxic mining sludge (6 billion barrels) to flood the entirety of
Washington, D.C.

Unsurprisingly, Ottawa has become a master at the cynical art of greenwashing.
When Harper's ministers aren't attacking former NASA scientist and climate
change canary James Hansen in the pages of the New York Times or lobbying
against Europe's Fuel Quality Directive (which regards bitumen as much dirtier
than conventional oil), his government has spent $100 million since 2009 on ads
to convince Canadians that exporting this oil is "responsible resource
development." Meanwhile, Canada has bent over backward to entice Beijing. Three
state-owned Chinese oil companies (all with dismal records of corporate
transparency and environmental sensitivity) have already spent more than $20
billion purchasing rights to oil sands in Alberta.
